Dear all,

Please review the following instructions about Final Project carefully. It will be another team project and the final deliverable of SSIE500 this semester.

The required task for the final project is to develop a substantially elaborated computer program in the programming language of your choice (Python or R) to process some real-world data (statistics, text, image, audio, time series, network, etc. etc.) using any of the information theoretic measures and methods covered (and to be covered) in this class, and derive interesting discoveries about the data you analyzed and the corresponding phenomenon(-a) you investigated.

Below are a few steps that you may find helpful to follow when completing the final project.

(1) Decide on the data your team is interested in working on. The data really can be of any type (statistics, text, image, audio, video, networks, etc.) and can be from any discipline or domain (mathematics, natural sciences, social sciences, engineering, arts, humanities, etc.). You can use open-source data online or data that you own/have rights to access as well.     

(2) Formulate your research question(s). Your research question(s) need to utilize one or more information theoretic measures/concepts/methods that we covered in class related to any of the entropy/complexity measures and/or information source coding techniques. The research question should be formulated such that the answer to it reveals interesting knowledge/patterns. As an example, "what is the information entropy in the characters used in modern English?" would NOT be nearly as good a research question as "how does character-wise information entropy differ between different language families?". You are also strongly encouraged to select questions that are inspired by your own thesis/dissertation research.  

(3) Complete the analysis. Implement the necessary computation using the programming language of your choice (Python or R) to answer your research question(s). 

The deliverables of the final project will include a final oral presentation, a final paper, and program code. The final presentations are to be delivered LIVE, in-person, in the order of your team number, on Monday Dec 1st and Wednesday Dec 3rd. Delivery on Zoom or via recording is NOT permitted UNLESS all team members are enrolled in an Enginet or remote section. Each team has 13 minutes to present their project in front of the class, followed by Q&A from the audience. All presentations are due before class Monday Dec 1st, regardless of which day your team presents. The due date for the final paper and the code is Wednesday Dec 10th so you will have one more week after all presentations are done to finalize your writing and coding. There will be two Assignment pages set up for this final project, one for the presentation and the other for the final paper and code, where one member of each team is responsible for submitting all the deliverables, just like for Midterm 1. 

When preparing your final presentation and (especially) final paper, make sure to describe these three components in sufficient detail and clarity: (a) what is the question: why it is interesting/important/we should care about it, you could briefly mention what has been done/what we already know about the topic as well; (b) what you did: describe in detail the data you used and the analysis you conducted to answer your research question, such that an educated reader can replicate your work independently, and; (c) what you found: your results and findings, what do the results tell you, what new knowledge you gained, etc. Your final presentation should also contain the components described above but in a summarized, brief fashion.  

I assume you will be working with your Midterm 1 team members again. I encourage you to start thinking about your project topic now. Feel free to run ideas by me in the upcoming weeks.

Prof. Wu